- Phytates
	- Pytates are in nutes and seeds
	- Phytates detoxify excess iron in the body which otherwise could create free radiaclas (-> DNA Mutation -> Cancer) 
	- Plant compunf slow down and stop cancer cell grwoth, phytates can revert cancer cells back to their normal cells
	-  Whole grains, beans, nuts, and seeds, phytates are rapidly absorbed into the bloodstream and readily taken up by tumor cells
	- ---
	- Subsequent research has suggested that dietary prevention of cancer may involve something other than just fiber. For instance, colorectal cancer rates are higher in Denmark than in Finland,[34](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-34)yet Danes consume slightly more dietary fiber than Finns.[35](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-35) What other protective compounds might explain the low cancer rates among plant-based populations? Well, fiber isn’t the only thing found in whole plant foods that’s missing from processed and animal-based foods.
		- 34. Malila N, Hakulinen T. Epidemiological trends of colorectal cancer in the Nordic countries. Scand J Surg. 2003;92(1):5–9.
		- 35. Englyst HN, Bingham SA, Wiggins HS, et al. Nonstarch polysaccharide consumption in four Scandinavian populations. Nutr Cancer. 1982;4(1):50–60.
	- The answer might lie in natural compounds called phytates, which are found in the seeds of plants—in other words, in all whole grains, beans, nuts, and seeds. Phytates have been shown to detoxify excess iron in the body, which otherwise can generate a particularly harmful kind of free radical called hydroxyl radicals.[36](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-36) The standard American diet may therefore be a double whammy when it comes to colorectal cancer: Meat contains the type of iron (heme) particularly associated with colorectal cancer[37](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-37) but lacks, as do refined plant foods, the phytates to extinguish these iron-forged free radicals.
		- 36. Graf E, Eaton JW. Dietary suppression of colonic cancer. Fiber or phytate? Cancer. 1985;56(4):717–8.
		- 37. Fonseca-Nunes A, Jakszyn P, Agudo A. Iron and cancer risk—a systematic review and meta-analysis of the epidemiological evidence. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2014;23(1):12–31.
	- Phytates appear to protect bone in a manner similar to that of antiosteoporosis drugs like Fosamax,[43](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-43) but without the risk of osteonecrosis (bone rot) of the jaw, a rare, potentially disfiguring side effect associated with that class of drugs.[44](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-44)
		- 43. Arriero Mdel M, Ramis JM, Perelló J, Monjo M. Inositol hexakisphosphate inhibits osteoclastogenesis on RAW 264.7 cells and human primary osteoclasts. PLoS ONE. 2012;7(8):e43187.
		- 44. Khosla S, Burr D, Cauley J, et al. Bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw: report of a task force of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. J Bone Miner Res. 2007;22(10):1479–91.
	- Of all the wonderful nutrients in beans, why do we credit the phytates with reduced risk? Petri-dish studies have shown that phytates inhibit the growth of virtually all human cancer cells tested so far—including cancers of the colon, breast, cervix, prostate, liver, pancreas, and skin[48](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-48)—while leaving normal cells alone.[49](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-49) This is the mark of a good anticancer agent, the ability to discriminate between tumor cells and normal tissue. When you eat whole grains, beans, nuts, and seeds, phytates are rapidly absorbed into the bloodstream and readily taken up by tumor cells. Tumors concentrate these compounds so efficiently that phytate scans can be used to trace the spread of cancer within the body.[50](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-50)
		- 48. Vucenik I, Shamsuddin AM. Protection against cancer by dietary IP6 and inositol. Nutr Cancer. 2006;55(2):109–25.
		- 49. Vucenik I, Shamsuddin AM. Cancer inhibition by inositol hexaphosphate (IP6) and inositol: from laboratory to clinic. J Nutr. 2003;133(11-Suppl-1):3778S–84S.
		- 50. Ogawa S, Kobayashi H, Amada S, et al. Sentinel node detection with (99m)Tc phytate alone is satisfactory for cervical cancer patients undergoing radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. Int J Clin Oncol. 2010;15(1):52–8.
	- Phytates target cancer cells through a combination of antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and immune-enhancing activities. Besides affecting the cancer cells directly, phytates have been found to boost the activity of natural killer cells, which are white blood cells that form your first line of defense by hunting down and disposing of cancer cells.[51](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-51) Phytates can also play a role in your last line of defense, which involves starving tumors of their blood supply. There are many phytonutrients in plant foods that can help block the formation of new blood vessels that feed tumors, but phytates also appear able to disrupt existing tumor supply lines.[52](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-52) Similarly, many plant compounds appear able to help slow down and even stop cancer cell growth,[53](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-53) but phytates can sometimes also cause cancer cells to apparently revert back to their normal state—in other words, to stop behaving like cancer. This cancer cell “rehabilitation” has been demonstrated in vitro in colon cancer cells,[54](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-54) as well as in cancer cells of the breast,[55](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-55) liver,[56](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-56) and prostate.[57](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-57)
		- 51. Vucenik I, Shamsuddin AM. Protection against cancer by dietary IP6 and inositol. Nutr Cancer. 2006;55(2):109–25.
		- 52. Vucenik I, Passaniti A, Vitolo MI, Tantivejkul K, Eggleton P, Shamsuddin AM. Anti-angiogenic activity of inositol hexaphosphate (IP6). Carcinogenesis. 2004;25(11):2115–23.
		- 53. Wang H, Khor TO, Shu L, et al. Plants vs. cancer: a review on natural phytochemicals in preventing and treating cancers and their druggability. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2012;12(10):1281–305.
		- 54. Yang GY, Shamsuddin AM. IP6-induced growth inhibition and differentiation of HT-29 human colon cancer cells: involvement of intracellular inositol phosphates. Anticancer Res. 1995;15(6B):2479–87.
		- 55. Shamsuddin AM, Yang GY, Vucenik I. Novel anti-cancer functions of IP6: growth inhibition and differentiation of human mammary cancer cell lines in vitro. Anticancer Res. 1996;16(6A):3287–92.
		- 56. Vucenik I, Tantivejkul K, Zhang ZS, Cole KE, Saied I, Shamsuddin AM. IP6 in treatment of liver cancer. I. IP6 inhibits growth and reverses transformed phenotype in HepG2 human liver cancer cell line. Anticancer Res. 1998;18(6A):4083–90.
		- 57. Shamsuddin AM, Yang GY. Inositol hexaphosphate inhibits growth and induces differentiation of PC-3 human prostate cancer cells. Carcinogenesis. 1995;16(8):1975–9.
-