 Prevention infections with a healthy immune system
	- Immune system general
		- Your first layer of protection against intruders are physical surface barriers like your skin. Beneath that are white blood cells, such as neutrophils that attack and engulf pathogens directly, and natural killer cells that put your cells out of their misery if they become cancerous or infected with a virus. How do natural killer cells recognize pathogens and infected cells? They are often marked for destruction by antibodies, which are special proteins made by another type of white blood cell, known as B cells, that home in like smart bombs and stick to invaders.
		- Each B cell makes one type of antibody that’s specific for one foreign molecular signature. You don’t have one B cell that covers grass pollen and another that covers bacteria; instead, you have a B cell whose only job is to make antibodies against the pollen of purple Siberian onion grass and another whose only job is to make antibodies against the tail proteins of bacteria that live in the thermal vents at the bottom of the ocean. If each of your B cells produces only one type of antibody, then you’d need to have a billion different types of B cells given the incredible variety of potential pathogens on our planet. And you do!
		- Let’s suppose one day you’re walking along and suddenly get attacked by a platypus (they have poisonous spurs on their heels, you know). For your whole life up until that point, the B cell in your body that produces antibodies against duck-billed platypus venom was just hanging around, twiddling its thumbs, until that very moment. As soon as the venom is detected, this specific B cell begins dividing like crazy, and soon you have a whole swarm of clones each producing millions of antibodies against platypus poison. You fend off the toxin and live happily ever after. That is how the immune system works—aren’t our bodies spectacular?
			- Chapter 7
	- Kale
		- As a dark-green, leafy vegetable, kale is not only one of the most nutrient-dense foods on the planet—it may also help fight off infection. Japanese researchers tried dripping a minute quantity of kale on human white blood cells in a petri dish, about one-millionth of a gram of kale protein. Even that miniscule quantity triggered a quintupling of antibody production in the cells.[24](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-24)
	- Broccoli
		- It’s a good idea for your skin to be waterproof so you don’t start leaking, but the lining of the gut has to allow for the absorption of both fluids and nutrition. With such a fragile layer between your sterile core and the chaos outside, you need to have a good defense mechanism in place to keep out the bad.
		- This is where the immune system comes in, specifically a special type of white blood cell called intraepithelial lymphocytes. These cells serve two functions: They condition and repair the thin intestinal lining, and they also serve as its first line of gut defense against pathogens.[28](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-28) These lymphocytes are covered with “Ah receptors” that activate the cells.[29](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-29) For years, scientists couldn’t find the key that fit into the Ah receptor lock. If we could figure out how to activate these cells, we might be able to boost our immunity.[30](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-30)It turns out that key is contained in broccoli.
			- 28. Sheridan BS, Lefrançois L. Intraepithelial lymphocytes: To serve and protect. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2010;12(6):513–21.
			- 29. Hooper LV. You AhR what you eat: linking diet and immunity. Cell. 2011;147(3):489–91.
			- 30. Esser C. Biology and function of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor: report of an international and interdisciplinary conference. Arch Toxicol. 2012;86(8):1323–9.
		- Why did our immune systems evolve to depend on certain vegetables? Well, when do we need to boost our intestinal defenses? When we eat. The body uses up a lot of energy to maintain its immune system, so why remain on high alert 24-7 when we only eat a few times a day? Why would our bodies specifically use vegetables as the bat signal to assemble the troops? We evolved over millions of years eating mostly weeds—wild plants, including dark-green, leafy vegetables (or, as they were known back then, leaves)—so our bodies may have evolved to equate vegetables with mealtime. Vegetables’ presence in the gut works as a signal to upkeep our immune systems.[32](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-32) So if we don’t eat plants with each meal, we may be undermining our bodies’ strategy to protect us.
			- 32. Hooper LV. You AhR what you eat: linking diet and immunity. Cell. 2011;147(3):489–91.
			- 33. Savouret JF, Berdeaux A, Casper RF. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its xenobiotic ligands: A fundamental trigger for cardiovascular diseases. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2003;13(2):104–13.
			- 34. Ashida H, Fukuda I, Yamashita T, Kanazawa K. Flavones and flavonols at dietary levels inhibit a transformation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor induced by dioxin. FEBS Lett. 2000;476(3):213–7.
		- 
	- Berries
		- For disease prevention, berries of all colors have “emerged as champions,” according to the head of the Bioactive Botanical Research Laboratory.[39](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-39) The purported anticancer properties of berry compounds have been attributed to their apparent ability to counteract, reduce, and repair damage resulting from oxidative stress and inflammation.[40](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-40) But it wasn’t known until recently that berries may also boost your levels of natural killer cells.
			- 39. Seeram NP. Recent trends and advances in berry health benefits research. J Agric Food Chem. 2010;58(7):3869–70.
			- 40. Seeram NP. Berry fruits for cancer prevention: Current status and future prospects. J Agric Food Chem. 2008;56(3):630–5.
		- Blueberries can boost the number of natural killer cells, but are there any foods that can boost killer cell activity—that is, how effectively they fight cancer cells? Yes, it seems an aromatic spice called cardamom may be one. Researchers put some lymphoma cells in a petri dish and added natural killer cells, which were able to wipe out about 5 percent of the cancer cells. But after researchers effectively sprinkled on some cardamom, the natural killer cells became supercharged and eradicated even more cancer cells—up to about ten times more than without cardamom.[43](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-43)
			- 43. Majdalawieh AF, Carr RI. In vitro investigation of the potential immunomodulatory and anti-cancer activities of black pepper (Piper nigrum) and cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum). J Med Food. 2010;13(2):371–81.
	- -
	- Boosting the Immune System with Exercise
		- What if there were a drug or supplement that could halve the number of sick days you take due to such upper-respiratory infections as the common cold? It would make some pharmaceutical company billions of dollars. But there is already something that can boost your immune system for free and by so much that you can achieve a 25–50 percent reduction in sick days. And it has only good side effects. What is it? Exercise.
			- 51. Nieman DC. Moderate exercise improves immunity and decreases illness rates. Am J Lifestyle Med. 2011;5(4):338–45.
		- 
	- Mushrooms
		- Do you suffer from seasonal allergies? Runny nose, itchy eyes, sneezing? While your allergies may make you feel lousy because your immune system is busily attacking things left and right, that same heightened state of alertness may have benefits for your overall health.
		- Individuals suffering from allergies appear to have a decreased risk for certain cancers.[70](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-70) Yes, your immune system might be in overdrive striking out at harmless things like pollen or dust, but that same overvigilance may also take down budding tumors in the body. It would be nice if there were a way to boost the part of the immune system that fights infections while down-regulating the part that results in chronic inflammation (and all those annoying symptoms).
		- Mushrooms may just do the trick.
		- Just as algae can be thought of as single-celled plants, yeast can be thought of as single-celled mushrooms. Thousands of edible mushrooms grow naturally, with worldwide annual commercial production in the millions of tons.[71](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-71) But check the nutrition label on a carton of mushrooms and you won’t see much beyond some B vitamins and minerals.
		- Is that all mushrooms have? No. What you don’t see listed is the array of unique myconutrients that may boost our immune function.[72](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-72)
		- Researchers in Australia split people into two groups. One group ate its regular diet, while the other ate its regular diet plus a cup of cooked white button mushrooms every day. After just a week, the mushroom eaters showed a 50 percent boost in the IgA levels in their saliva. These antibody levels remained elevated for about a week before dropping.[73](file:///text/part0049.html#chapter5-73) So, for sustained benefits, try to make mushrooms a steady part of your diet.
		- ---
		- 70. Merrill RM, Isakson RT, Beck RE. The association between allergies and cancer: what is currently known? Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2007;99(2):102–16.
		- 71. Wakchaure GC. Production and marketing of mushrooms: global and national scenario. In: Singh M, ed. Mushrooms: Cultivation, Marketing and Consumption. Indian Council of Agricultural Research Directorate of Mushroom Research; 2011.
		- 72. Jeong SC, Koyyalamudi SR, Pang G. Dietary intake of Agaricus bisporus white button mushroom accelerates salivary immunoglobulin A secretion in healthy volunteers. Nutrition. 2012;28(5):527–31.
-