- Turmeric
	- [Curcumin/Tumeric](https://dynalist.io/d/tdHeiL7hAuzqMuTpMhKqvjqJ#z=XjCbeAbuu2w-shDXl1Nls3tL)
	- Cancer in indiea is much lower
	- One reason could be Tumeric
	- ---
	- India’s gross domestic product (GDP) is about eight times less than that of the United States,[11](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-11) and about 20 percent of its population lives below the poverty line,[12](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-12) yet cancer rates in India are much lower than in the United States. Women in the United States may have ten times more colorectal cancer than women in India, seventeen times more lung cancer, nine times more endometrial cancer and melanoma, twelve times more kidney cancer, eight times more bladder cancer, and five times more breast cancer. Men in the United States appear to have eleven times more colorectal cancer than men in India, twenty-three times more prostate cancer, fourteen times more melanoma, nine times more kidney cancer, and seven times more lung and bladder cancer.[13](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-13) Why such a discrepancy? The regular use of the spice turmeric in Indian cooking has been proposed as one possible explanation.[14](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-14)
		- 11. International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook Database. http://bit.ly/1bNdlWu. April 2015. Accessed May 2, 2015.
		- 12. World Bank. World Development Indicators. http://data.worldbank.org/country/india. 2011. Accessed May 2, 2015.
		- 13. Bengmark S, Mesa MD, Gill A. Plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. Nutr Hosp. 2009;24(3):273–81.
		- 14. Hutchins-Wolfbrandt A, Mistry AM. Dietary turmeric potentially reduces the risk of cancer. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011;12(12):3169–73.
	- In chapter 2, we saw how curcumin, the yellow pigment in the spice turmeric, may be effective against cancer cells in vitro. Very little of the curcumin you eat gets absorbed into your bloodstream, however, so it may never come in sufficient contact with tumors outside the digestive tract.[15](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-15) But what doesn’t get absorbed into your blood ends up in your colon, where it could impact the cells lining your large intestine where cancerous polyps develop.
		- 15. Sharma RA, Euden SA, Platton SL, et al. Phase I clinical trial of oral curcumin: biomarkers of systemic activity and compliance. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10(20):6847–54.
	- Studying smokers, who tend to have a lot of aberrant crypt foci, investigators found that curcumin consumption could reduce the number of those cancer-associated structures in their rectums up to nearly 40 percent, from eighteen down to eleven, within just thirty days. The only reported side effect was a yellow tint to their stools.[16](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-16)
		- 16. Carroll RE, Benya RV, Turgeon DK, et al. Phase IIa clinical trial of curcumin for the prevention of colorectal neoplasia. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011;4(3):354–64.
	- What if polyps have already developed? Six months of curcumin, along with another phytonutrient called quercetin, which is found naturally in such fruits and vegetables as red onions and grapes, were found to decrease the number and size of polyps by more than half in patients with a hereditary form of colorectal cancer. Again, virtually no side effects were reported.[17](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-17)
		- 17. Cruz-Correa M, Shoskes DA, Sanchez P, et al. Combination treatment with curcumin and quercetin of adenomas in familial adenomatous polyposis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006;4(8):1035–8.
	- What if the polyps have already transformed into cancer? In a last-ditch attempt to save the lives of fifteen patients with advanced colorectal cancer who didn’t respond to any of the standard chemotherapy agents or radiation, oncologists started them on a turmeric extract. In the two to four months of treatment, it appeared to help stall the disease in one-third of the patients, five out of fifteen.[18](file:///text/part0047.html#chapter4-18)
		- 18. Sharma RA, McLelland HR, Hill KA, et al. Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic study of oral Curcuma extract in patients with colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2001;7(7):1894–900.